---
author: Sukhdeep Singh
categories:
- Kafka
date: May, 21
description: ''
post_status: publish
post_type: post
tags:
- Guide
- tutorials
- Kafka
thumbnailUrl: https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Apache-Kafka-into-Action-31.png
title: Put Apache Kafka into Action - Implementation
---

We already discussed Apache Kafka in detail in previous articles. If you
didn't get the chance to go through them, then I'll suggest you go through
them. It's 4 article series detailing every aspect of Kafka in an easy-to-
understand manner.

## Development environment setup

Now, let's implement a producer and consumer in Python. We'll be using
`confluent_kafka` python module to interact with Kafka brokers. It provides
the methods to build producers and consumers. Later, we'll also see how to use
this module to create Kafka _topics_.

Then, let's start with installing `confluent_kafka` module first:

    
    
    $ pip install confluent_kafka
    

After installing, let's create a configuration file where we'll be storing all
the Kafka-specific parameters such as _bootstrap servers, topic name, consumer
group id, security parameters_ , etc.

Let's create a `.env` file to store these parameters.

    
    
    BOOTSTRAP_SERVERS=localhost:9092,localhost:9094
    TOPIC=monitoring_topic
    CONSUMER_GROUP=group-1
    SECURITY_PROTOCOL=SSL
    CA_FILE=certs/ca.pem
    CERT_FILE=certs/service.cert
    KEY_FILE=certs/service.key
    

Our _certificate_ files are stored inside the _cert_ folder. You can change it
to any location.

Now, we'll load these parameters programmatically. This will avoid us from the
hassle of setting these parameters every time whenever we restart our system.
Moreover, I don't want to set these parameters in my system's environment when
I need them only for my current program. `python-dotenv` is one such module
which will help us in this regard. Hence, let's install it first:

    
    
    $ pip install python-dotenv
    

Now, let's load our environment variables:

    
    
    from dotenv import load_dotenv
    import os
    
    load_dotenv()
    

## Producer implementation

After loading the environment variables, let's initialize the Kafka producer.

    
    
    from confluent_kafka import Producer
    
    def get_producer():
        conf_broker = {
            'bootstrap.servers': os.environ.get("BOOTSTRAP_SERVERS"),
            'security.protocol': os.environ.get("SECURITY_PROTOCOL"),
            'ssl.ca.location': os.environ.get("CA_FILE"),
            'ssl.certificate.location': os.environ.get("CERT_FILE"),
            'ssl.key.location': os.environ.get("KEY_FILE")
        }
    
        return Producer(**conf_broker)
    

We've already discussed why these parameters would be required. If there is
not any security parameter, then you can skip the last 4 configuration
parameters. However, if you're using a username/password instead of
certification files, then you will have to replace these 4 lines with what
parameters we discussed in our [previous article](https://pennow.tech/the-
dummies-guide-to-kafka-operations/#Security_parameters).

Let's now invoke the `produce` method to send the data to Kafka:

    
    
    producer = get_producer()
    topic = os.environ.get("TOPIC")
    data = "Hello dear!"
    producer.produce(
        topic,
        value=data.encode('utf-8'),
        callback=delivery_callback)
    

If you also want to key to deliver your messages to a particular partition,
then you can pass one `key=[key-name]` argument to `produce()` method. Replace
_[key-name]_ with the actual value without any square brackets.

If you want to pass JSON data instead of plain text, you'll have to
_serialize_ that. That's easier to do:

    
    
    value=json.dumps(data).encode('utf-8')
    

As `produce()` is an **asynchronous call** , so we don't know whether our
message is delivered or not. For that, we're passing a callback function
`delivery_callback()` that will be called whenever message delivery is
successful or failed. Let's implement this callback function:

    
    
    def delivery_callback(err, msg):
        if err:
            print(f'Message delivery failed: {err}')
        else:
            print(f'Message delivered to {msg.topic()} [{msg.partition()}] @ offset {msg.offset()}')
    

There is one more thing to do before this callback can be called, and that's
to call `poll()` method. This method is called whenever an event occurs such
as a message delivered etc.

    
    
    producer.poll(0)
    

It accepts _time-to-wait_ as an argument, and its value is in a unit of
_seconds_. We don't want it to block for any event. That's why we passed
_zero_.

Now whenever any event occurs, it'll call our callback function, passed to
`produce()` method.

Remember, we mentioned above that `produce()` method is an asynchronous call.
So that means it will just send the message and return immediately. If you
want it to wait, then you can use `flush()` it immediately after that.
However, I'm against that as that will impact Kafka's throughput. But it is
required in one scenario, and that is when you want to shut down your
producer. In that case, you want to make sure that all your messages are
delivered to Kafka.

    
    
    producer.flush()
    

You can also add _exception handling_ in case your `produce()` method fails:

    
    
    try:
        producer.produce(...)
    except BufferError as err:
        print(f'Producer queue is full with {len(producer)} messages waiting to be delivered to broker.')
        
    

Now if the producer fails because its message queue gets full, then our
program will report an error. Notice here we use `len(producer)` function to
find out how many messages are waiting in queue to be delivered to the broker.

With this our **_producer_** implementation is complete. You can find the
complete code at the bottom.

## Consumer Implementation

Steps to initialize _consumer_ is almost similar with a few additions.

    
    
    def get_consumer():
        conf_broker = {
            'bootstrap.servers': os.environ.get("BOOTSTRAP_SERVERS"),
            'group.id': os.environ.get("CONSUMER_GROUP"),
            'session.timeout.ms': os.environ.get("SESSION_TIMEOUT"),
            'auto.offset.reset': 'earliest',
            'security.protocol': os.environ.get("SECURITY_PROTOCOL"),
            'ssl.ca.location': os.environ.get("CA_FILE"),
            'ssl.certificate.location': os.environ.get("CERT_FILE"),
            'ssl.key.location': os.environ.get("KEY_FILE")
        }
    
        return Consumer(**conf_broker)
    

Here, we specified three extra parameters from the producer:

  * `group.id`: It specifies the consumer group id.
  * `session.timeout.ms`: This is the timeout period to check the liveness of the consumer. A consumer should regularly send a heartbeat before this timeout expires. Otherwise, the broker will remove the consumer. This is helpful in cases like consumer crashes.
  * `auto.offset.reset`: This is used to define the behavior of the consumer when there is no committed position (which would be the case when the group is first initialized) or when you (manually) specify offset. There are three options to handle this behavior: 
    * `earliest`: this means to receive the messages which were present even before subscribing.
    * `latest`: this means receiving the messages that arrive after the consumer subscribed. It is the _default_.
    * `none`: this is used when you want to manually specify the offset. However, it will throw an exception to the consumer if the provided offset is found out of range. In that case, handle the error manually.

Let's implement the feature to _poll_ messages:

    
    
    consumer = get_consumer()
    consumer.subscribe(os.environ.get("TOPIC"))
    
    def start():
        while True:
            try:
                msg = consumer.poll(1.0)
                process_msg(msg)
            except KeyboardInterrupt:
                break
    

`poll()` is a blocking call and used to poll the messages from Kafka. Time is
specified in milliseconds. This value should always be lesser than what we
configured under `session.timeout.ms`. Otherwise, the timeout will be elapsed,
and consumers will be thrown out for the reasons mentioned above.

Here, we're continuously polling the messages inside a _while_ loop. We come
out only when someone presses `Ctrl+C`.

If you want to specify the partitions instead of a topic, you can use
`assign()` method. However, that has some caveats attached to it, which you
can refer to [here](https://dzone.com/articles/dont-use-apache-kafka-consumer-
groups-the-wrong-wa).

**Process message**

    
    
    def process_msg(msg):
        if msg is None:
            return None
        if msg.error():
            print(f'Consumer error: {msg.error()}')
            return None
    
        data = json.loads(msg.value().decode('utf-8'))
        print(f'Received message: {data}')
    

If no message could be polled between specified times, then we don't have to
do anything. That's why we simple returned (line 3)

However, if some error has occurred, then we'll print that error(line 5).

Each message contains a number of information such as topic, partition,
offsets, key, and value of the message. This time we're interested only in the
value. Thus let's retrieve the value(line 8) and print it.

In the end, we'll close the session.

    
    
        consumer.close()
    

This will let Kafka free the resources assigned to it. Otherwise, Kafka will
have to wait for `session.timeout.ms` to realize that the consumer has gone
down.

Source Code: [Kafka-producer-consumer](https://github.com/pennowtech/kafka-
producer-consumer).

## Conclusion

With today's article, let's conclude our discussion on working with Kafka. We
started our series of four articles with the basic principles of Kafka. Then
we discussed its architecture and various components. We also discussed how to
get started with Kafka setup and the most used commands. Today we discussed
how to implement a producer and consumer in Python. A similar process can be
followed in other languages too.

Now, we're here. At end of our Journey 🙂

However, if you still need any clarification or want to provide me with your
valuable feedback, then please let me know through your comments 📝

Title image credit: [Business photo created by freepik -
www.freepik.com](https://www.freepik.com/photos/business)
