---
author: Sukhdeep Singh
categories:
- Python
date: May, 21
description: ''
post_status: publish
post_type: post
tags:
- Programming
- Slack
- app development
thumbnailUrl: https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/event-handling-title-img.svg
title: 'Slack App with Python: Handling Slack Events [Part-3]'
---

Listening to events from Slack gives you more control over activities going
inside Slack. You can delete the messages, you can react on emojis, or you can
file a bug and many more.

* * *

In the last article, we saw[ how to send a message to
Slack](https://pennow.tech/sending-messages-to-slack/). However, we cannot see
what exactly is going inside the channel or what messages are sent😕. We want
to have a provision to watch those activities and take action. Let's say any
user sends a _Hello!_ message. Our python app will reply to him back with
_Hello [username]_. Here, _username_ will be replaced with the actual name of
the user. We'll also add one more feature.  whenever anyone sends _emoji_ ,
we'll reply back with the same _emoji_. Yeah, that's pretty much possible!
This is where Slack _events_ come into play🚀. Let's see how this will work.
__Note Slack supports many events. You can refer to the full [list of slack
events](https://api.slack.com/events) on its website.

## Configuring Slack events

This article is part of: [Most effective way to understand Slack app
development](https://pennow.tech/essential-skills-to-develop-slack-apps/)

Before using the _event_ feature, first, configure it. Open your app
configuration in the [Slack UI](https://api.slack.com/). Click on **Event
Subscriptions** in the UI sidebar and toggle the **Enable Events** radio
button (1). [caption id="attachment_1429" align="alignnone"
width="774"]![enable-slack-events](https://pennow.tech/wp-
content/uploads/2021/05/enable-slack-events.png) Enable Slack Events[/caption]
When you _enable events_ , it will immediately ask for the **Request URL**.
This is the URL where Slack will send the events. Then, you will have to
capture events from there. But before that, we need a URL. Hence, Let us get a
URL before going to step 2.

### Getting a web URL

We can run a web server on our machine. However, chances are big that your
server will not be accessible from outside of our local network. Then how to
access this? This problem can be solved by **ngrok**.

### Working with ngrok

Download _ngrok_ from its [website](https://ngrok.com/download) and run it as:

    
    
    ngrok http 5000
    

`3000` is a port number. **Note down this port number.** We'll need this in
our python program later. Copy the **HTTPS** _Forwarding endpoint_ from the
output. We'll need it in our next step and future articles too. [caption
id="attachment_1434" align="alignnone" width="772"]![running-ngrok-
webserver](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/running-ngrok-
webserver.png) Running ngrok webserver[/caption]  __Attention! The problem
with ngrok is that the HTTPS Forwarding name is changed every two hours. This
requires you to update Slack Request URLs too. Otherwise you will not be able
to receive the events. [vortex](https://www.vortexhub.io/) is a better
alternative in this regard. However, for our learning purpose, 2 hours time is
sufficient.🚴

### Configure _Request URL_ under the _Events_ page

We got the URL now. Now, we also need to specify endpoints where our python
app will be listening for our events. By default, Slack sends events on
`/slack/events`. So the combination of these two will compose a _complete_
**Request URL** Now, go back to step 2 of Configuring Slack events, and enter
the URL copied from _ngrok_ window along with _endpoints_. [caption
id="attachment_1429" align="alignnone" width="774"]![enable-slack-
events](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/enable-slack-
events.png) Enable Slack Events[/caption] Slack will make an attempt to
connect to your endpoint. If everything goes fine, you should see **Request
URL** **Verified**. Otherwise, make sure you follow the same steps as
mentioned above.  __Note Whenever your ngrok URL changes, you must _change_
these Request URLs too. Otherwise, your application will fail to respond to
events.

### Subscribe to Bot Events

The next step is to _subscribe to the bot events_ on the same page. There are
four kinds of events, which you can subscribe to:

  * `message.channels` if you want to listen to all the messages posted on public channels
  * `message.groups` if you want to listen to all the messages posted on private channels
  * `message.im` if you want to listen to all the messages posted in your DMs
  * `message.mpim` if you want to listen to all the messages posted in multi-person DMs

_Remember, for the first two events, your app must be part of the intended
channels._ For our current article, let's add **message.channels** events
permission. This will allow us to receive all of the messages posted on our
channel. [caption id="attachment_1430" align="alignnone" width="681"]![enable-
slack-events-message](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/enable-
slack-events-message.png) enable slack events for messages[/caption]
**message.channels** also require **channels:history** scope. This _scope_
will be added automatically when you press on **Save Changes** button at the
bottom. You can verify this by going to **Features > OAuth & Permissions >
Scopes ** After saving your changes, you need to **reinstall your app** as
displayed on top. [caption id="attachment_1433" align="alignnone"
width="652"]![reinstall-slack-workspace](https://pennow.tech/wp-
content/uploads/2021/05/reinstall-slack-workspace.png) Reinstall slack
workspace[/caption]

> Every time you change _permissions_ you'll need to **reinstall** your app.

Our configuration part for this section is done now. Let's implement event
handling now.

## Application Flow Diagram

Before going further with our implementation. Let's take a halt, and take a
look at our sequence diagram: ![](https://pennow.tech/wp-
content/uploads/2021/05/Event-Flow-Sequence-Diagram.png) We completed the
first three parts, and now moving further with the last implementation of the
last leg in our _sequence diagram_

## Implementation to listen and react to events

Now initialize your slack app as usual:

    
    
    import os
    from dotenv import load_dotenv
    from slack_bolt import App
    
    load_dotenv()
    
    # Initializes your app with your bot token and signing secret
    app = App(
        token=os.environ.get("SLACK_API_TOKEN"),
        signing_secret=os.environ.get("SLACK_SIGNING_SECRET")
    )
    

If you want to understand what we did above, then refer to our first chapter
in series of [getting started with Slack](https://pennow.tech/slack-app-
getting-started/#start-with-implementation)

### Run local webserver

One change from previous articles is that now you also need to run your python
app as a _webserver_. I'll call this a _local webserver_. Our local webserver
should connect with the ngrok server which we ran earlier. That's why it
should run on the same port which we specified while running _ngrok_ : port
number **5000** :

    
    
    ...
    if __name__ == "__main__":
        app.start(port=5000)
    

Run your program, and it should display that `Bolt app is running!` The next
step we'll do is to _listen for message events_.

### Handling for _message_ events

To listen for _message_ events, use `@app.message `decorator specifying
_messages_ which you want to listen to. So if we just want to listen to
"hello" messages, then your decorator should be `@app.message('hello')`. Now,
add event handling for this message:

    
    
    @app.message('hello')
    def hello_handler(payload, say):
        say(f"Hello <@{payload['user']}>!\nHow are you?")
    

As you can see there are two parameters passed to our handler function:
`payload`, and `say`. There are more but we'll discuss them in coming
discussions. These parameters are passed automatically by the Slack app
decorator. `payload` contains all the information related to the events such
as who sent the message, message text, etc. `say` is a function that sends a
message to the **_associated channel_**. You can use it to send simple text
messages or complex messages in JSON format. The last line is simply sending a
message to the sender retrieved through `payload['user']`. Now, run your
program, and sends a message from Slack. You should get the response: [caption
id="attachment_1432" align="alignnone" width="361"]![message-event-response-
output](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/message-event-response-
output.png) Message event response output[/caption]  __Note To send a message
to a different channel: `say(text=text, channel=welcome_channel_id)`

#### Using regular expressions to handle events

There is a catch in the current program. It can respond to any "hello"
messages (starting with small 'h') but not to "Hello" messages (starting with
'H'). So do we need to write two different handlers for them? The answer is
_No_. Regular expressions will come to our rescue 😄

    
    
    import re
    ...
    @app.message(re.compile("(hello|Hello)"))
    def hello_handler(payload, say):
        say(f"Hello <@{payload['user']}>!\nHow are you?")
    

There is another catch with this code. Now it will respond to any message
containing the string 'hello' or 'Hello'. For example, if someone enters a
garbage string such as 'dushallo', it will still respond. You can try at your
end 😄 To handle this, again regular expression is at the rescue. The only
change required is to replace the above regular expression with the below:

    
    
    @app.message(re.compile("^(hello|Hello)$"))
    

You can try other regular expressions tricks too. 🌟

### Handling emojis

If you want to take action on emoji, then that's also simple. Instead of
listening for a message, listen for emoji:

    
    
    @app.message(":wave:")
    def emoji_handler(payload, say):
        say(f"Hey <@{payload['user']}>, {payload['text']}")
    

The above program will listen for 👋 emojis and responds back with the same
emoji along with _greeting_ text. Try this at your end.

### Handling Reactions

Slack users can react to messages with emojis. To react to any message, just
hover your mouse on the required messages, and you will be presented with a
menu. There you can click on the _face_ icon to react to any message. [caption
id="attachment_1435" align="alignnone" width="549"]![sending-reaction-from-
slack](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/sending-reaction-from-
slack.png) Sending reaction from slack[/caption] So whenever anyone reacts
with emojis, Slack sends a **reaction_added** event.

#### Configuring _reaction_added_ event

To handle this reaction, first, provide permission to listen for this event.
Open Slack [configuration webpage](https://api.slack.com/apps), select your
app, and navigate to **Features > Event Subscriptions**. Click on **Add Bot
User Event** under **Subscribe to bot events** , and add _*reaction_added_.
[caption id="attachment_1428" align="alignnone" width="710"]![enable-slack-
event-for-reaction](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/enable-
slack-event-for-reaction.png) Enable slack event for reaction[/caption]

#### Add an event handler for _reaction_added_

To listen to any such events, use `event()` the method provided by
_slack_bolt_ module, and pass _event name_ :

    
    
    @app.event("reaction_added")
    def reaction_added(payload, say):
        emoji = payload["reaction"]
        emoji_text = f':{emoji}:'
        say(emoji_text)
    

Here, our app responds with the same emoji whichever was reacted with.

### Reacting with emoji reaction instead of emoji message

But what if you want to react with an emoji instead of sending a message. Is
that possible? Yeah, that's pretty much possible. First, enable permission
scope for **reactions:write** from **Features > OAuth & Permissions**, and
then modify your code for `reaction_added` function:

    
    
    @app.event("reaction_added")
    def reaction_added(payload, say, client):
        channel_id=payload["item"]["channel"]
        ts=payload["item"]["ts"]
    
        client.reactions_add(
            name="wave",
            channel=channel_id,
            timestamp=ts,
        )
    

One **important** thing to note is that we're sending our reaction message at
the same timestamp value when the reaction was received. This is required
because we want to react to the same emoji. Otherwise, it will be shown as a
new message. Now, when you run the program, it should react with 👋 to every
emoji. You can even react with the same emoji or different emojis. That's now
up to your creativity. 🍧 Source code: [handling_events.py
(GitHub)](https://github.com/pennowtech/slack-app-python-slack-
bolt/blob/master/handling_events.py) __Reference I'd again suggest you at
least have a glance at all the [events supported by
Slack](https://api.slack.com/events). That will help you a lot in the future
while designing your app.

## Summary

This was a pretty interesting chapter so far. Now we can know how to react to
any event 👂 Let's summarize what all we covered:

  * how to setup configure events and endpoints through Slack
  * implementing event handler for messages, emojis, and reactions.
  * in between, we also discussed how to set up proxy webservers if we've limitations in accessing our app from outside of our network.

Overall, it was a good learning experience. I really enjoyed discussing this
topic. If you need clarification on any part, please let me know through your
comments.✨
