---
author: Sukhdeep Singh
categories:
- Kafka
date: May, 21
description: ''
post_status: publish
post_type: post
tags:
- Guide
- tutorials
- Kafka
thumbnailUrl: https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/hand-3044387_1280.jpg
title: Learning Apache Kafka is Not Difficult Now
---

Kafka is full of surprises and that makes it a little confusing to understand
in the beginning. However, it's not that too difficult to understand if you
have the right material available with you. That's why I thought to note down
my points and share them with you wonderful people.

* * *

In common usage, Apache Kafka is known as a _publish-subscriber-based_
messaging system. That means one party _publishes_ a message and another
party, which _subscribed_ for that message, will receive it. However, there is
more to it. Let's discuss all the intricacies involved in making this process
smoother.

## Discussion Roadmap üöµ

To understand anything better, the best way is to start from the ground. I
know many of you guys already know a lot about Apache Kafka, yet I'll suggest
you follow the principle of - _unlearn to learn_. With that in mind, we'll
start with Apache Kafka features. Then, we'll look into Kafka _Architecture_
and the various components which are part of the Kafka ecosystem. There we'll
discuss how these components help in the daily routine of Kafka. _Yes, I'm
treating Kafka as a person_ üòÑ . _That helps me to understand technology in a
better way_. Once we're clear of Kafka fundamentals, we'll embark on our
journey to discuss how to install Kafka. Once Kafka is ready, we'll start
working on a full-fledge application to explore the operating model of Kafka.
We'll be doing it in small and easy steps. So instead of discussing it all in
a single article, we'll divide it into multiple articles. Apache Kafka is a
publish-subscribe-based fault-tolerant messaging system. It is fast, scalable
and distributed by design.

## Why Kafka is so popular? ü•á

Points which I could think of behind Apache Kafka's popularity are not many.
However, whatever makes Apache Kafka popular among industry-veterans are
really too important:

  * Apache Kafka is designed as a **distributed messaging system** in comparison to traditional messaging systems.That means you can distribute your Kafka ecosystem on multiple clusters. That eventually raises its throughput and efficiency by multiple times. Not just this, but now Kafka can also handle failures very easily.
  * Kafka is based on the **publish-subscribe patterns**. That means to send a message only once and received by multiple parties/consumers.
  * This has a highly **efficient queuing system**. Thus it can handle a large volume of data from thousands of publishers and consumers simultaneously.
  * Messages are **stored on the disk** that eventually helps to **replicate** them to other Kafka clusters. Messages are also **not deleted immediately** after consumption. This adds another feather to its robustness.
  * Kafka's **streaming** platform allows you to **process data on the fly**. Hence, you don't have to store your data in some file or database first, and then processing later. Instead, process your data on the fly.
  * Above all, Kafka is too **simple to set up and operate**. In spite of having so many complex features, it isn't difficult to use at all. The only _thing required is the right source of information_.

There could be more. However, these are the 6 amazing benefits provided by
Kafka. In short, Kafka is very fast and guarantees zero downtime and zero data
loss. Thus, if you require any of these features for your projects, then Kafka
is a promising choice. However, if your requirement is just to have a simple
message queuing system, then Kafka isn't a good choice.

## The beauty of the publish-subscribe pattern üé´

[caption id="attachment_1575" align="alignnone" width="745"]![pub-sub-
pattern](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/pub-sub-pattern.png)
Pub-Sub Pattern[/caption] We mentioned the publish-subscribe messaging system
a few times before. So I thought to take a halt to discuss this pattern before
moving ahead. In **traditional queuing systems** , messages are sent
**directly to the consumer**. There is a very close bonding between producer
and consumer. Producer/sender can send to the only linked consumers. Another
limitation is that **producers can send only to one party** or consumer. If
there is more than one party, which is interested to receive that message,
then no provision is provided by these queuing systems. The publisher-consumer
pattern solves both of these problems. **Sender publishes** the messages on a
common platform, and **consumers register** on that platform. Now the
publisher is not linked to any consumer. Instead, it is sending to a
platform/channel from where others can receive it. This makes it possible to
send a message once, and consumed by thousands.  __Note In Kafka, this
platform/channel is analogous to topics  Apart from this, its publisher-
subscriber pattern has some other benefits too:

  * If the consumer is slow to read the data, then it doesn't have to worry about messages being getting piled up in the producer's queue.
  * if the consumer crashes, then it doesn't lose the data. It can continue from where it left off. In Kafka's terms, it can continue reading from the last _committed_ position.

## Use cases üî≠

I can list the end number of use cases for Kafka. However, I don't feel that's
part of our discussion. Hence, I'll mention a few typical cases only where
Kafka can be extremely helpful. **Website core operations** Website activities
like page views, clicks, searches, etc. can be published to Kafka channels in
real-time. From there, it can be read by various consumers such as
recommendation systems, data analytics, etc. **Communication between
microservices** Kafka can be used as a communication medium between various
microservices. I even feel it can replace microservice architecture in the
future. **Aggregation of logs and events** Kafka can be used to collect logs
and events from various services, and then distribute them to multiple
consumers. This helps to develop a robust and extremely fast log aggregation
system. **Stream Processing** You can even read data on the fly, _process_
that data, and write back to another topic. Processing could involve end
number of possibilities such as aggregation, statistics analysis, and many
more. This scenario can be useful where you want to present the data in a
required format. **Data collection from IoT sensors** Kafka is a popular
choice to publish data from various sensors. You can even publish data to
multiple sensors. That way all sensors can work independently and effectively.
Big brands like _LinkedIn, Uber, Netflix, Coursera, and Pinterest_ are already
using Kafka Keep in mind that Kafka is not a replacement for the database. If
you want to store your data for the long term, then you should have a
database. Of course, you can have another consumer who can write to DB. That's
your design decision how many consumers you need and how to do that,

## Summary üìú

We'll finish our today's discussion here itself. Before calling it a day,
let's quickly summarize our discussion: We started our discussion with a
general introduction of Apache Kafka, and what makes it an amazing choice
between the various stakeholders. We also touched a little bit on the
publisher-subscribe messaging system, one of the essential features of the
Kafka ecosystem. We also saw a few use cases where Kafka could be an effective
option. In the next article, we'll start with the architecture of the Kafka
system and the various components. Bis bald üç∑

Title image credit:[Hintergrund Vektor erstellt von rawpixel.com -
de.freepik.com](https://de.freepik.com/vektoren/hintergrund)
