---
author: Sukhdeep Singh
categories:
- Python
date: May, 21
description: ''
post_status: publish
post_type: post
tags:
- Programming
- Slack
- app development
thumbnailUrl: https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/sending-message-to-slack.svg
title: 'Slack App with Python: Sending Messages to Slack [Part-2]'
---

One can send plain text messages to Slack or a complex one comprised of
multiple sections. We'll cover both approaches here.

* * *

For our discussion, we'll create a new channel. We'll be using that for our
future work too. It's not required to create a new channel. However, we would
not like to flood other channels with our testing or learning data.

## Create a new channel

Open your slack window, and click on **+** along **Channels** on the left side
of Slack. This will present you with a menu either to _browse channels_ or
_create a channel_. Click on **Create a Channel**

This article is part of: [Most effective way to understand Slack app
development](https://pennow.tech/essential-skills-to-develop-slack-apps/)

In the next window, enter a _name_ for your channel, and an optional
description. If you want your channel to be _private_ , then click on **Make
Private**. Click on **Create** , and your channel should be created. [caption
id="attachment_1396" align="alignnone" width="640"]![create-a-new-
channel](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/create-a-new-
channel.png) Create a new channel[/caption]

## Add app to newly created channel

Your app can't send messages to any channel. For this, it should be part of
that channel. So let's add our app to this channel. Type **/add** , and select
_Add apps to this channel_. [caption id="attachment_1394" align="alignnone"
width="904"]![](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/add-app-to-
newly-created-channel.png) Add app to newly created channel[/caption] It'll
present you with another screen where you've to select your app. Click **Add**
against your app, and voila ðŸ¥³ ! Your app is now ready to talk through this
channel. [caption id="attachment_1395" align="alignnone" width="902"]![connet-
your-slack-app](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/connet-your-
slack-app.png) Add your slack app to the channel[/caption]

## Sending messages from your app

Now, get back to our development machine, and open a new python file.
Initialize slack application as we did in the last chapter:

    
    
    import os
    from dotenv import load_dotenv
    from slack_bolt import App
    
    load_dotenv()
    
    app = App(
        token=os.environ.get("SLACK_API_TOKEN"),
        signing_secret=os.environ.get("SLACK_SIGNING_SECRET")
    )
    

We already covered these statements in detail. If you need to refresh your
concepts, then refer to the previous article on [how to get started with
Slack](https://pennow.tech/slack-app-getting-started/). Now, our app is
initialized. Sends a message to our newly created channel: **#web-monitor**.
Notice the `#` symbol before the channel name. That's required if you're using
the name of the channel instead of its _channel id_.

    
    
    response = app.client.chat_postMessage(channel='#web-monitor', text="Hello!")
    
    if response.get('ok'):
        print('Message was sent successfully.')
    

Here we used slack's `chat_postMessage` to send the message to our channel.
We're storing the return result in variable `response`. Later we check if the
message send was successful, then display the message.  __Test before use If
you want you can also [test `chat_postMessage` Slack APIs on its
website](https://api.slack.com/methods/chat.postMessage/test) Now, run the
program, and you should receive a notification from Slack that a message is
received. you should also receive the above text message in your terminal that
the _Message was sent successfully._ [caption id="attachment_1398"
align="alignnone" width="901"]![slack-message-sent](https://pennow.tech/wp-
content/uploads/2021/05/slack-message-sent.png) Slack message sent[/caption]
However, If it fails with something like:

    
    
    slack.errors.SlackApiError: The request to the Slack API failed.
    The server responded with: {'ok': False, 'error': 'not_in_channel'}
    

Then, make sure that you added your app to the intended channel. Another
possible error could be that `channel_not_found`. If that's the case, then
make sure that channel exists and you named it correctly.

## Add exception handling in case of failure

We noticed above that whenever any failure occurs, Slack APIs through an
exception: `SlackApiError`. Let's use python's `try...except` construct to
handle this exception.

    
    
    from slack_sdk.errors import SlackApiError
    ...
    try:
        response = app.client.chat_postMessage(channel='#web-monxitor', text="Hello!")
        print('Message was sent successfully.')
    except SlackApiError as err:
        print (f'Message failed: {err}')
    

All are pretty straightforward. First, we imported `SlackApiError` a module to
handle any failures associated with our message failure. Then we used to put
our _message sending_ code inside `try...except` the construct. Now whenever
any failure occurs, your program shouldn't crash. Instead, it should stop
disgracefully displaying the error message.  __Tip If you want to post to any
public channel, then add `chat:write.public` to Scopes under **Features >
OAuth & Permissions > Scope**. We discussed this in a previous article on [how
to add scopes.](https://pennow.tech/slack-app-getting-started/#provide-
permission-to-the-app)

## Formatting the message

We saw how to send plain text messages. However, do you know you can also send
a formatted message: A message consisted of various kinds of formats like
markdown texts, buttons, input box, etc.  __Attention! Pay full attention to
this part. This is going to be a foundation stone for our whole discussion.
Slack messages are composed of multiple
[blocks](https://api.slack.com/messaging/composing/layouts) in JSON format:

    
    
    {
      "blocks": [{}, {}, {}],
    }
    

There are quite a few kinds of blocks, but we'll touch only `section`
comprised of `text` blocks.

    
    
     {
        "blocks": [
          {
              "type": "section",
              "text": {
                  "type": "mrkdwn",
                  "text": "This is *first* Text"
              }
          },
          {
              "type": "section",
              "text": {
                  "type": "mrkdwn",
                  "text": "This is *second* text"
              }
          }
        ]
    }
    
    

As you can see there are two `section` blocks under `blocks`. `section`
further composed of `text`. One interesting thing to note here is that text
_types_ are specified as `mrkdown`. That means you can also write your texts
in _markdown_ syntax.  __Note Support for markdown syntax is very limited as
[documented in the mrkdwn
docs](https://api.slack.com/messaging/composing/formatting#basics). This will
require a little change in our _message sending_ API too:

    
    
    try:
        response = app.client.chat_postMessage(
            channel='#web-monitor', 
            blocks=msg['blocks'], 
            text='Message Received')
    
    except SlackApiError as err:
        print(f'Message failed: {err}')
    

As it's visible from the highlighted lines, now we need to send `blocks` along
which carries the message we just crafter in our previous step. You might be
surprised then what's the purpose of `text` inside the API. Your curiosity is
valid. As of now our text is composed of complex blocks so these can't be
displayed in notifications such as mobile phone notifications or desktop
notifications. To ease notification handling, we use `text` to specify what to
display in notifications when any message is received. Now run your program,
and you should receive two formatted strings in the _Slack_ window. [caption
id="attachment_1397" align="alignnone" width="463"]![](https://pennow.tech/wp-
content/uploads/2021/05/slack-formated-message.png) Slack formatted
message[/caption] Source code: [post_messages_to_slack.py
(GitHub)](https://github.com/pennowtech/slack-app-python-slack-
bolt/blob/master/post_messages_to_slack.py)

## Summary

I'll say this was really an important article. Even if this was quite basics
but this will help us a lot in our coming discussions. Here, we discussed:

  * how to create a new channel in the _slack application_ ,
  * how to add our app to this channel,
  * sending a simple text message to the channel
  * handling failures while sending a message to the Slack
  * finally, we concluded our discussion by sending a message comprised of multiple _blocks_

Overall, this was a small chapter but an important part of our journey. If you
need any further clarification, please let me know through your comments.
