---
author: Sukhdeep Singh
categories:
- Python
date: May, 21
description: ''
post_status: publish
post_type: post
tags:
- Programming
- Slack
- app development
- tutorials
thumbnailUrl: https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/m_07.svg
title: 'Slack App with Python: Pin and Unpin Messages [Extra]'
---

Slack provides the feature to _pin_ your messages. That way they can be
reached quickly. Hence, whenever you feel any messages should be easily
accessible such as company policies or FAQs, just pin those messages.

* * *

To pin any message, we can simply do it from the **_context menu_** of a
required message. To access _pinned_ messages quickly, click on the
_information_ symbol at the top, and reach to the **Pinned** section in the
right sidebar of the _Slack_ app. [caption id="attachment_1564"
align="alignnone" width="920"]![pin_messages](https://pennow.tech/wp-
content/uploads/2021/05/pin_messages.gif) pin messages[/caption] However, if
we want to pin any messages programmatically, then how to do that? Thanks to
Slack APIs. That is also very easy. In this article, we will discuss how to
pin a message just after it is posted to the channel. First, I'll suggest you
get to the [API webpage](https://api.slack.com/methods/pins.add). There, you
will notice that this feature requires you to enable the _scope_ for
`pins:write`. Let's add that scope.

## Configuring scope to pin the messages

Open your web configuration page, and navigate to **Features > OAuth &
Permissions**. Scroll down a little below to locate **Scopes** , and add a new
scope: `pins:write`. Once done, **reinstall your workspace** either by:

  * clicking from the _yellow bar_ shown at the top or
  * from the button displayed under **OAuth Tokens for Your Workspace** on the same page.

On the next screen, click **Allow** and you're done with the configuration.

If you need a refresh on how to do it, refer very first article in the series
on how to [provide permissions to the app](https://pennow.tech/slack-app-
getting-started/#Provide_permission_to_the_app).

## Handling implementation

To pin a message, you will need to provide the `channel` id and the
`timestamp` of the message that you want to pin.  __Note Combination of
`channel` and `timestamp` provides a unique reference to any message Whenever
in doubt about any arguments, always refer to the [API testing
webpage](https://api.slack.com/methods/pins.add). That's really helpful if you
want to:

  * understand the various parameters required,
  * know the scopes needed to configure, and also
  * to test your API before implementing.

Getting a timestamp is very easy. Whenever you send any message through
`chat.postMessage` or `say()`, it returns you a response back. Parse that
response to get the timestamp of the sent message: Now, let's start with the
implementation

This article is part of: [Most effective way to understand the Slack app
development](https://pennow.tech/essential-skills-to-develop-slack-apps/)
series.

**Initialize the App** First, [initialize the app](https://pennow.tech/slack-
app-getting-started/#Start_with_implementation).

    
    
    import os
    from dotenv import load_dotenv
    from slack_bolt import App
    
    load_dotenv()
    
    # Initializes your app with your bot token and signing secret
    app = App(
        token=os.environ.get("SLACK_API_TOKEN"),
        signing_secret=os.environ.get("SLACK_SIGNING_SECRET")
    )
    

The next step is to send the message and retrieve its _timestamp_ which is
stored inside `ts`:

    
    
    response = app.client.chat_postMessage(channel='#web-monitor', text="Hello!")
    timestamp = response['ts']
    

This is the `timestamp` which we will use to pin our message through
`pins.add` method:

    
    
    slack_client.pins_add(timestamp=timestamp, channel= channel_id)
    

Now, whatever message we sent last, will be pinned. [caption
id="attachment_1565" align="alignnone" width="882"]![pinned-message-
display](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/pinned-message-
display.png) pinned message display[/caption] You can _pin_ any message this
way.

### Unpin a message

Unpinning a message is also easier. Just call `pin.remove()` API with the same
parameter and value which we used during `pin.add()` method.

    
    
    app.client.pins_add(timestamp=timestamp, channel= channel_id)
    

An exactly similar approach can be used with the message sent by `say()`
method. Try at your end.  Source Code:
[pin_message.py](https://github.com/pennowtech/slack-app-python-slack-
bolt/blob/master/pin_messages.py)

## Summary

This really was a small article in comparison to what we discussed before ðŸ™‚.
In this article, we discussed:

  * an idea behind pins how they can be helpful
  * how to configure `pins:write` scope so that we can pin a message
  * finally the implementation, and important criteria required to pin a message

Overall, this was a very small discussion without any complex configurations
or implementation.

Title image credit: [Web Vectors by Vecteezy](https://www.vecteezy.com/free-
vector/web)
