---
author: Sukhdeep Singh
categories:
- Python
date: May, 21
description: ''
post_status: publish
post_type: post
tags:
- Programming
- Slack
- app development
- tutorials
thumbnailUrl: https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/publish-dialogues-title.png
title: 'Slack App with Python: Publishing UI Messages [Part-5]'
---

Slack has the features like buttons, select-menus, date-pickers, and more. You
can add these features to your message, and make them more interactive. This
tutorial will walk you through how to use these features to make your app
interactive

* * *

Till now we're seeing simple messages to interact with our app such as
_events_ , and _slash commands_. However, if we need to pass multiple
information, then this is where the _slack_ app's _interactive components_
come into play. For a better understanding, take the example of a form. One
can open the form, and submit it back after filling in the required
information. This way we can send multiple information to the app. Our working
prototype will look like this by end of this chapter: [caption
id="attachment_1471" align="aligncenter" width="689"]![Slack-dialgue-window-
response](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Slack-dialgue-window-
response.png) Slack dialogue window-[/caption] Browse the [interactive
components](https://api.slack.com/block-kit/interactivity) to see a full list
of components.

Refer to my first article to get the essence of the whole of this discussion:
[Most effective way to understand Slack app
development](https://pennow.tech/essential-skills-to-develop-slack-apps/)

Before proceeding further, let us discuss how to layout the UI of our
interactive message.

## Brief Overview of _Slack Block Kit Builder_

[Block Kit Builder](https://api.slack.com/tools/block-kit-builder) is a tool
that helps to visually prototype the layout of a UI with various components.
These components can range from simple texts to _select boxes, radio boxes,
and many more_. ![Slack-kit-builder](https://pennow.tech/wp-
content/uploads/2021/05/Slack-kit-builder.png) Slack kit builderInteractive
components such as _buttons, checkboxes_ , etc. are on the left. Simply click
on the one, which you need, and drag it to the middles window. This is where
you can preview your app. You can also customize the layout by directly
modifying the _JSON file on the right side of the builder UI_. If you want to
know the structure of this JSON file, then you're advised to refer to [Block
Kit instructions on how to build](https://api.slack.com/block-kit/building)
Once you're done with your design, copy the whole of the JSON code from the
right side of the window. Open your python file and store it in a variable. If
it's a little confusing, then just hold on for a few minutes. We will be doing
the same in our current article.  __Important As we saw in previous articles
that we can send a message in JSON format. So that's the basis of this whole
design. The Builder tool lets you layout your interactive message and
generates the corresponding JSON. That JSON is then used directly in our app.

## Compose your interactive message

Now, we have got a glimpse of _Slack Block kit Builder_ , let's design our UI
message or dialogue window. Open _[Block Kit
Builder](https://app.slack.com/block-kit-builder)_ webpage, and design a
simple layout for right now: [caption id="attachment_1469" align="aligncenter"
width="457"]![Dialogue-window-preview](https://pennow.tech/wp-
content/uploads/2021/05/Dialogue-window-preview.png) Dialogue window
preview[/caption] Here, we added a header with the text "Web Monitoring
Configuration", an input box to ask for a URL with a _hint_ below that. At the
very bottom, we've two buttons to _submit_ and _cancel_ the operation. Copy
the corresponding JSON text from the same page to your source code:

    
    
    def get_dialog_data():
        dialog_data = {
            "blocks": [
                {
                    "type": "header",
                    "text": {
                        "type": "plain_text",
                        "text": "Web Monitoring Configuration"
                    }
                },
                {
                    "type": "input",
                    "block_id": "url_input_block",
                    "element": {
                        "type": "plain_text_input",
                        "action_id": "sl_input",
                        "placeholder": {
                            "type": "plain_text",
                            "text": "Enter URL"
                        }
                    },
                    "label": {
                        "type": "plain_text",
                                "text": "URL"
                    },
                    "hint": {
                        "type": "plain_text",
                                "text": "URL of website to be monitored"
                    }
                },
                {
                    "type": "input",
                    "block_id": "buttons_block",
                    "element": {
                        "type": "static_select",
                        "placeholder": {
                            "type": "plain_text",
                            "text": "Select",
                        },
                        "options": [
                            {
                                "text": {
                                    "type": "plain_text",
                                    "text": "Every Minute"
                                },
                                "value": "minuetly"
                            },
                            {
                                "text": {
                                    "type": "plain_text",
                                    "text": "Hourly"
                                },
                                "value": "hourly"
                            },
                            {
                                "text": {
                                    "type": "plain_text",
                                    "text": "Daily"
                                },
                                "value": "daily"
                            }
                        ],
                        "action_id": "static_select-action"
                    },
                    "label": {
                        "type": "plain_text",
                                "text": "Monitoring Frequency",
                    }
                },
                {
                    "type": "divider"
                },
                {
                    "type": "actions",
                    "elements": [
                        {
                            "type": "button",
                            "text": {
                                "type": "plain_text",
                                "text": "Submit"
                            },
                            "style": "primary",
                            "action_id":"submit_pressed",
                            "value": "submit"
                        },
                        {
                            "type": "button",
                            "text": {
                                "type": "plain_text",
                                "text": "Cancel"
                            },
                            "style": "danger",
                             "action_id":"cancel_pressed",
                             "value": "cancel"
                        }
                    ]
                }
            ]
        }
    
        return dialog_data
    

Just like before, I stored it inside a function for better readability, and
code cleanliness. Whenever we need to display a UI on Slack, we'll invoke this
function to return us with the JSON.  __Notice Every block should have a
unique `block_id` component to distinguish itself from other blocks. This will
help us to access the block information in our source code as we'll see later.
In addition, every actionable component like select-boxes, buttons should have
`action_id`. This will be sent to our app whenever any event occurs on them.
It helps our app to identify what action to take. I'll suggest you play with
_Block Kit Builder_. That will help you to understand it better.

## Slack configuration for _Interactivity_ feature

Similar to _events_ and _slash commands_ , we'll need to specify a **Request
URL**. Whenever any action occurs such as button clicks, Slack will send the
information to that URL. First, we need to enable **interactivity** through
the configuration webpage. Navigate to **Features > Interactive Components**,
and enable **interactivity**. When _interactivity_ is enabled, fill out the
information for the **Request URL**. Just like we did for _events_ and _slash
commands_ , you need to specify the webserver address and endpoint. Slack
sends a message to this URL whenever any **action** occurs such as button
clicks Finally, _save_ the changes. [caption id="attachment_1485"
align="aligncenter" width="801"]![Configure Slack
interactivity](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Configure-
interactivity-1.png) Configure Slack interactivity[/caption] This page also
has the option to configure **Shortcuts** , which we will be discussing in
coming articles. The next step is to implement source code to add
interactivity. This I'll divide further into two steps. Otherwise, this
article will become too long ðŸ˜„:â€‹

  * Publish a message that contains interactive elements like buttons and text boxes
  * Listen for events when a user responds such as submitting the form, etc.

We'll cover the first part of this article, and the second part will be cover
in the next article.

## Publishing an interactive message

If you've followed my articles on the slack app from the beginning, then this
part should be very easy to implement. It is just like sending a normal
message to _slack_ apps. Open the same python file where we stored the JSON
data of the message. Let's [initialize our slack
app](https://pennow.tech/slack-app-getting-
started/#Start_with_implementation):

    
    
    import os
    from dotenv import load_dotenv
    from slack_bolt import App
    
    load_dotenv()
    
    app = App(
        token=os.environ.get("SLACK_API_TOKEN"),
        signing_secret=os.environ.get("SLACK_SIGNING_SECRET")
    )
    ...
    if __name__ == '__main__':
        app.start(port=5000)
    

Now, send the dialogue message to _Slack_ :

    
    
    app.client.chat_postMessage(channel='#web-monitor', blocks=get_dialog_data()['blocks'])
    

As of now, we know that `chat_postMessage()` sends the message to channel
supplied through `channel=` parameter. Another parameter is `blocks=`
containing the information of _blocks_ to display. Now, run the program and
you should receive the same display as mine: [caption id="attachment_1471"
align="alignnone" width="689"]![Slack-dialgue-window-
response](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Slack-dialgue-window-
response.png) Slack dialogue window[/caption] See how easy it was all to
achieve to send a fully-featured dialogue to the slack app. However, this
doesn't sound interesting that dialogue message is sent only once and that too
at startup. ðŸ˜ž So, let's make it a little interactive. There are two ways to do
it.

  * Send it when a particular **_slash command_** is entered

  * Through **_shortcuts_** , _which we'll discuss in coming articles_.

### Sending dialogue message on slash command

Let's use our knowledge of what we learned in the previous article on [sending
slash commands](https://pennow.tech/slack-slash-commands/). Thus whenever we
receive a slash command: `/webmonitor create` we'll send this dialogue window.
Let's start with our slash command implementation:

    
    
    @app.command("/webmonitor")
    def webmonitor_command_handler(ack, say):
        ack()
        say (blocks=get_dialog_data()['blocks'])
    

Yeah, that's it. It's done. ðŸ˜„ We just invoked the slack module's command
handler for `/webmonitor` command, and then called `say()` function to send
our dialogue message. **Remember** to send `ack()` within 3 seconds otherwise
Slack will cry for `operation timeout`. Now, run the program and enter the
slash command: `/webmonitor`. You should be presented with a UI. Voila! ðŸŒŸ It's
done. Before concluding this article, let's add a few checks and
verifications. The major change here is to display the _job creation form_
only when the user supplies `create` as part of slash command (`/webmonitor
create`).

    
    
    @app.command("/webmonitor")
    def webmonitor_command_handler(ack, say, payload, respond):
        ack()
        command_params = payload.get('text')
    
        if command_params is None:
            respond ('Nothing to do')
            return
    
        if command_params == 'create':
            say (blocks=get_dialog_data()['blocks'])
        else:
            respond('Invalid parameters')
    

Now, run the program, and it should work as per the above requirements. Source
Code: [publish_dialogue.py](https://github.com/pennowtech/slack-app-python-
slack-bolt/blob/31853a3b0a49d267b478c62942892df216af2c1a/publish_dialogue.py)

## Summary

We are concluding our discussion here. In the next article, we will discuss
how to handle interactivity in our python application such as text inputs or
button clicks. Let's summarize what all we discussed in this article:

  * We started our discussion with a brief overview of the _Slack Block Kit Builder_ tool to build beautiful UI/dialogue for our messages.
  * We configured interactivity through the _slack app_ configuration page
  * Finally, we posted this message to the _slack app_ whenever a user enters a given slash command.

Title Image Source: [Developer Vectors by
Vecteezy](https://www.vecteezy.com/free-vector/developer)
