---
author: Sukhdeep Singh
categories:
- Python
date: May, 21
description: ''
post_status: publish
post_type: post
tags:
- Programming
- Slack
- app development
- tutorials
thumbnailUrl: https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/message-shortcut-title.png
title: 'Slack App with Python: Working with Message Shortcuts [Part-9]'
---

Shortcuts really are very handy if designed and programmed with full knowledge
of the feature. That's the reason I divided this component into two separate
articles to cover all the essential features while keeping each article short.

* * *

In the [previous article](https://pennow.tech/slack-app-working-with-
shortcuts/), we covered what are shortcuts, and how to configure them. We also
covered how to implement Global shortcuts. This article is in continuation of
that. Here we'll start our discussion with message shortcuts. As said before,
message shortcuts are a convenient way when you want to pass the corresponding
message information to the shortcuts. This helps us build a powerful UI as
we'll see soon.

## Message Shortcuts

We already [configured the message shortcut](https://pennow.tech/slack-app-
working-with-shortcuts/#Message_shortcut_configuration). Let's build an app
with the help of message shortcuts. Our app's purpose is to help us raise an
issue whenever any issue is reported. It'll have the following fields:

  * **Context information** : This will be retrieved automatically from the message context. The text could be like website down, failure, etc.
  * **#id** : A number assigned automatically. Displayed at the top.
  * **Assignee** : Whom to assign from the team
  * **Planned date** (optional): Till when to fix the issue
  * **Extra Details** (optional): Any detail which could be supportive.

Let's open [Slack Kit Builder](https://pennow.tech/slack-publishing-ui-
messages/#Brief_Overview_of_Slack_Block_Kit_Builder), and layout our view.
It'd look like this: [caption id="attachment_1540" align="aligncenter"
width="588"]![Raise-ticket](https://pennow.tech/wp-
content/uploads/2021/05/Raise-ticket.png) Raise ticket[/caption] When the view
is ready, copy the JSON to your source code. Just like before, I'll be storing
it inside a function, and returning from there. One important piece of
information to note down from here is `callback_id` which we'll require later
while implementing form submission.

    
    
    def raise_ticket_view():
        return ({
            "type": "modal",
            "callback_id": "ticket_create_view",
            "title": {
                    "type": "plain_text",
                    "text": "Raise a Ticket"
            },
            "submit": {
                "type": "plain_text",
                "text": "Submit"
            },
            "blocks": [
                {
                    "type": "section",
                    "block_id": "ticket_info_block",
                            "fields": [
                                {
                                    "type": "mrkdwn",
                                    "text": "Monitoring Report for: <http://abc.com/gc>"
                                },
                                {
                                    "type": "mrkdwn",
                                    "text": "*Website Status:*\nNot Found"
                                }
                            ]
                },
                {
                    "type": "divider"
                },
                {
                    "type": "context",
                    "block_id": "ticket_id_block",
                            "elements": [
                                {
                                    "type": "mrkdwn",
                                    "text": ":label: *Ticket ID: *"
                                },
                                {
                                    "type": "mrkdwn",
                                    "text": "1"
                                }
                            ]
                },
                {
                    "type": "input",
                    "block_id": "select_assignee_block",
                            "element": {
                                "type": "static_select",
                                "placeholder": {
                                        "type": "plain_text",
                                    "text": "Select an assignee :woman-raising-hand:",
                                            "emoji": True
                                },
                                "options": [
                                    {
                                        "text": {
                                            "type": "plain_text",
                                            "text": "User 1",
                                            "emoji": True
                                        },
                                        "value": "u1"
                                    },
                                    {
                                        "text": {
                                            "type": "plain_text",
                                            "text": "User 2",
                                            "emoji": True
                                        },
                                        "value": "u2"
                                    },
                                    {
                                        "text": {
                                            "type": "plain_text",
                                            "text": "User 3",
                                            "emoji": True
                                        },
                                        "value": "u3"
                                    }
                                ],
                                "action_id": "select_assignee_action"
                            },
                    "label": {
                                "type": "plain_text",
                                "text": "Assignee",
                                "emoji": True
                            }
                },
                {
                    "type": "input",
                    "optional": True,
                            "block_id": "datepicker_block",
                            "element": {
                                "type": "datepicker",
                                "placeholder": {
                                        "type": "plain_text",
                                    "text": "Select a planned date",
                                            "emoji": True
                                },
                                "action_id": "datepicker-action"
                            },
                    "label": {
                                "type": "plain_text",
                                "text": "Date",
                                "emoji": True
                            }
                },
                {
                    "type": "input",
                    "block_id": "extra_detail_block",
                            "optional": True,
                            "element": {
                                "type": "plain_text_input",
                                "multiline": True,
                                "max_length": 200,
                                "action_id": "extra_detail_action"
                            },
                    "label": {
                                "type": "plain_text",
                                "text": "Extra Detail",
                                "emoji": True
                            },
                    "hint": {
                                "type": "plain_text",
                                "text": "Max limit is 200 characters"
                            }
                }
            ]
        })
    

Just like we did for _Global_ shortcuts, implement a shortcut handler for
message shortcuts in the same way. There won't be any change except `callback
id` which we configured for message shortcut:

    
    
    @app.shortcut("raise-website-issue-cb")
    def raise_issue_shortcut(ack, payload, client):
        ack()
    
        client.views_open(
            trigger_id=payload["trigger_id"],
            view= raise_ticket_view()
        )
    

Now run your python app, and click on the shortcut. You should be presented
with a UI. **_Kudos to you_** 💎💎

## Implement view submission

Let's go a step further, and process the data submitted by the form. As we
discussed before that submitting a [slack modal view triggers `view()`
method](https://pennow.tech/slack-app-open-modal-
views/#Handling_job_submission) This method requires `callback_id` of the
view/form. Just _keep in mind_ that these view's callbacks are different from
callbacks we specified for shortcuts. view's `callback_id` can be retrieved
from the JSON which we copied from Slack Builder Kit.

    
    
    @app.view("ticket_create_view")
    def ticket_submitted(ack, payload, body, say):
        planned_date = payload['state']['values']['datepicker_block']['datepicker-action']['selected_date']
        if validate_date(planned_date) is False:
            ack({
                "response_action": "errors",
                "errors": {
                    "datepicker_block": "Planned date can't be in past"
                }
            })
        else:
            ack()
    
            say(process_submission_request(payload), channel='#web-monitor')
    

Just like before, we used `view()` method to handle view submission (line 1)
Then we verified that mentioned date isn't in past (line 4). If it's in past,
we'd throw an error(line 5) which will be displayed on the view form.
Otherwise, we move forward and parse the packet (line 14). and send the
response back. Following is the parsing logic to fetch the required values
from the payload:

    
    
    def process_submission_request(payload):
        values = payload['state']['values']
    
        # These details are retrieved from payload['blocks']
        url_val = payload['blocks'][0]['fields'][0]['text']
        url_status = payload['blocks'][0]['fields'][1]['text']
        ticket_id = payload['blocks'][2]['elements'][1]['text']
    
        # These details are retrieved from payload['state']['values]
        assignee_val = values['select_assignee_block']['select_assignee_action']['selected_option']['value']
        assignee_text = values['select_assignee_block']['select_assignee_action']['selected_option']['text']['text']
        planned_date = values['datepicker_block']['datepicker-action']['selected_date']
        extra_detail = values['extra_detail_block']['extra_detail_action']['value']
    
        return store_ticket(url_val, url_status, ticket_id, assignee_text, assignee_val, planned_date, extra_detail)
    
    

This was just a simple get and store function. Pay attention to the last
function. This is up to you to decide how you want to define this function.
You can either store it in some database or pass it to some message queues or
whatever you want. In our case, we just displayed these values back to the
user as a confirmation message.

## Implementation to store the ticket

To design, let's again go back to the **Slack Builder Kit** and layout our
confirmation dialogue: [caption id="attachment_1545" align="aligncenter"
width="463"]![Ticket-raise-confirmation](https://pennow.tech/wp-
content/uploads/2021/05/Ticket-raise-confirmation.png) Ticket raise
confirmation[/caption] Copy the corresponding JSON file from the right side of
the _Builder Kit_ window and store it inside the same function which was
supposed to store the ticket: `store_ticket()`. I also filled the JSON message
with these values.

    
    
    def store_ticket(url_val, url_status, ticket_id, assignee_text, assignee_val, planned_date, extra_detail):
        return ({
            "attachments": [
                {
                    "color": "#4289b9",
                    "blocks": [
                        {
                            "type": "header",
                            "text": {
                                "type": "plain_text",
                                "text": "Ticket Raised Successfully",
                                "emoji": True
                            }
                        },
                        {
                            "type": "context",
                            "block_id": "ticket_id_block",
                            "elements": [
                                {
                                    "type": "mrkdwn",
                                        "text": ":label: *Ticket ID: *"
                                },
                                {
                                    "type": "mrkdwn",
                                    "text": ticket_id
                                }
                            ]
                        },
                        {
                            "type": "section",
                            "fields": [
                                {
                                    "type": "mrkdwn",
                                    "text": f"*Ticket:*\n{url_val}"
                                },
                                {
                                    "type": "mrkdwn",
                                    "text": f"{url_status}"
                                }
                            ]
                        },
                        {
                            "type": "section",
                            "fields": [
                                {
                                    "type": "mrkdwn",
                                    "text": f"*Planned Date:* :calendar: \n{planned_date}",
                                },
                                {
                                    "type": "mrkdwn",
                                    "text": f"*Assigne Name:*\n{assignee_text}({assignee_val})",
                                }
                            ]
                        },
                        {
                            "type": "context",
                            "elements": [
                                {
                                    "type": "plain_text",
                                    "text": f"Extra Detail: :lower_left_fountain_pen: {extra_detail}",
                                    "emoji": True
                                }
                            ]
                        }
                    ]
                }
            ]
        })
    

Now everything is done. Run your program, and try to create a ticket from the
message context menu. After filling in the required parameters, press the
submit button and you should get the confirmation in your Slack window:
[caption id="attachment_1546" align="aligncenter" width="841"]![Ticket-raise-
confirmation-display](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Ticket-
raise-confirmation-display.png) Ticket raise confirmation display[/caption]
This way we implemented our _message shortcut_. Let's conclude it here.
Source Code:
[handling_message_shortcuts.py](https://github.com/pennowtech/slack-app-
python-slack-bolt/blob/master/handling_message_shortcuts.py)

## Practice at your end

This implementation is not foolproof. It has the scope of a lot of
improvements. Major improvement required here is to take care that the right
message is selected to raise a ticket. As the context menu can be invoked from
any shortcuts, so it might not have the required information which we need.
The result of selecting any such message will be that your program will not
work as expected. To implement logic to handle that. Another option is to
store values in a database The third option could be to increment the ticket
id every time a new ticket is raised. All of these are very simple to
implement assignments.

## Summary

Today's discussion was quite interesting. We developed two full-fledged
modules in the two-part discussion. All was too exciting and satisfying. Now,
let's summarize what we did discuss today: We started our today's discussion
with the implementation of the message shortcut. Here, we implemented a
feature to raise a ticket whenever any issue is reported by our web monitor
app. A message is also sent as a confirmation when the form is submitted. I'll
say this article was full of fun🎳 . In the next article, we'll be discussing
how to pin our messages so that important messages could be easily accessible
instead of getting lost in the flood of messages. Till then, enjoy your time👍

Title image credit: [Development Stock photos by
Vecteezy](https://www.vecteezy.com/free-photos/development)
