---
author: Sukhdeep Singh
categories:
- Python
date: May, 21
description: ''
post_status: publish
post_type: post
tags:
- Programming
- Slack
- app development
- tutorials
thumbnailUrl: https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Slack-shortcut-title-image.svg
title: 'Slack App with Python: Working with Shortcuts [Part-8]'
---

Shortcuts are a convenient way provided by _Slack_ to work with dialogues.
These are easily accessible either through the message composer window or
through the message context menu.

* * *

## Types of Shortcuts

As discussed below, there are two types of shortcuts provided by Slack. One is
a _message shortcut_ , and another is a _global shortcut_. Both can be
configured from the same webpage. However, there use case is totally different
from each other. Let's see how.

### Message Shortcuts

Message shortcuts are initiated from the context menu of a message. These are
an ideal choice when you want to pass the corresponding message information to
the shortcuts. An example could be to _raise an issue_ when you receive any
kind of notification such as the website is down. [caption
id="attachment_1549" align="aligncenter" width="726"]![Slack-Message-
Shortcut](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Slack-Message-
Shortcut.gif) Slack Message Shortcut[/caption]

This article is part of: [Most effective way to understand the Slack app
development](https://pennow.tech/essential-skills-to-develop-slack-apps/)
series.

### Global Shortcuts

Global shortcuts are initiated from the button provided on your message
composer window. As these are not initiated from any message, so they can be
called independently of any context. This makes them an ideal choice when you
want to start afresh. An example could be to create a new _web-monitoring
job_. [caption id="attachment_1548" align="aligncenter" width="725"]![Slack-
global-Shortcut](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Slack-global-
Shortcut.gif) Slack global Shortcut[/caption] Let's summarize our use case
once again:

  * Global shortcuts to create a new _website monitoring job_
  * Message shortcuts to raise an issue ticket when any _outing is notified_

> I've divided this article into two parts. This article will revolve mostly
> around configuration section of both types of messages, and implementation
> of Global Shortcuts. In the next part of the discussion we'll touch upon
> implementation of [Message shortcuts](https://pennow.tech/slack-app-working-
> with-message-shortcuts/).

## Slack Configuration For Shortcuts

Shortcuts can be configured from the **Features > Interactive Components**
page. For that, you need to enable **Interactivity** first, and then
[configure the **Request URL**](https://pennow.tech/handling-slack-
events/#Getting_a_web_URL). By default, slack sends every shortcut message to
`/slack/events` endpoint. ![](https://pennow.tech/wp-
content/uploads/2021/05/Configure-interactivity-1.png)

### Create Slack shortcuts

Now, on the same page, a little down, you'll notice a section: **Shortcut**.
There you click on the button **Create New Shortcut**. [caption
id="attachment_1542" align="aligncenter" width="771"]![slack-create-
shortcut](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/slack-create-
shortcut.png) slack create shortcut[/caption]

#### Global shortcut configuration

On the next screen select **Global** , and click **Next**. You will be
presented with a form to fill such as:

  * **Name** : This will be shown when pressing the _shortcut_ button. Let's name it as `webmonitor create`
  * **Short Description** : A short description of the shortcut
  * **Callback ID** : identifier to distinguish your callback: `webmonitor-job-cb`

[caption id="attachment_1543" align="aligncenter" width="570"]![Slack-global
-shortcut creation](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Slack-
global-shortcut-creation.png) Slack global shortcut creation[/caption] Click
**Create** and it should be created and displayed under **shortcuts** on the
same configuration page.

#### Message shortcut configuration

Same way, create a _message shortcut_. The only difference is that this time
selects the **On message** after clicking **Create New Shortcut** button. Rest
all the information will be same.

  * **Name** : This will be shown when pressing the _shortcut_ button. Let's name it as `Raise Website Issue`
  * **Short Description** : A short description of the shortcut
  * **Callback ID** : identifier to distinguish your callback: `raise-website-issue-cb`

Now, you should have two shortcuts created under your **Shortcuts** : [caption
id="attachment_1544" align="aligncenter" width="778"]![slack-shortcuts-
created](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/slack-shortcuts-
created.png) slack shortcuts created[/caption] Finally, click on the **Save
Changes** button at the bottom, and you're done with the configuration. Now
open your _Slack_ window, and both newly created shortcut should be visible in
the _context menu_ as well as _message shortcuts_ However, clicking on either
of them will only through an error: [caption id="attachment_1538"
align="aligncenter" width="402"]![Empty-slack-shortcuts-not-
implementation](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Empty-slack-
shortcuts-not-implementation.png) slack shortcuts no implementation[/caption]
It's obvious because they haven't been implemented yet. So let's start
implementing it. Before proceeding further, let's revise how Slack's event
system works, and how it can help us to handle any shortcut. [caption
id="attachment_1541" align="aligncenter" width="1060"]![Shortcut Sequence
Diagram](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Shortcut-Sequence-
Diagram.png) Shortcut Sequence Diagram[/caption]

## Implementing Shortcuts

Shortcuts use `shortcut()` method to listen for any shortcut event. This
method expects `callback id` which we provided while configuring our
shortcuts.

### Global Shortcuts

With this information in hand, let's implement our _global_ shortcut:

    
    
    @app.shortcut("webmonitor-job-cb")
    def webmonitor_shortcut(ack, payload, client):
        ack()
    
        client.views_open(
            trigger_id=payload["trigger_id"],
            view= job_create_view()
        )
    

Code for this is almost similar to what we discussed during our [modal view
implementation](https://pennow.tech/slack-app-open-modal-
views/#Implementing_job_creation_view) for website monitoring job creation. I
reused that code here with a single line change at the top:
`@app.shortcut()`as we're listening for shortcut events now. As we discussed
before that _modal views_ require [a `trigger_id` to open a
view](https://pennow.tech/slack-app-open-modal-views/#Defining_a_view) and we
also know that every shortcut contains a `trigger_id`.So that makes it
possible to open a view whenever a shortcut is pressed. **Now our shortcut is
ready. Yeah, that's it** âœ¨ ðŸ˜Š Run your program, click on _shortcuts_ in your
message composer box and type your shortcut name which we specified while
configuring. [caption id="attachment_1539" align="aligncenter"
width="865"]![Global-shortcut-display](https://pennow.tech/wp-
content/uploads/2021/05/Global-shortcut-display.png) Global shortcut
display[/caption] Clicking on it'll open the _website monitoring job creation
form_. If you fill in the wrong URL, it'll give you an error. On providing a
valid URL, it'll provide you with the result of whether the website is up and
working or any issue with that. If it reports any issue, then let's raise a
ticket. For this, we'll use _message shortcuts_ because of their inherent
feature to provide context information. However, we'll discuss that part in
the [coming article](https://pennow.tech/slack-app-working-with-message-
shortcuts/).  Source Code:
[handling_global_shortcuts.py](https://github.com/pennowtech/slack-app-python-
slack-bolt/blob/master/handling_global_shortcuts.py)

## Summary

We've to stop our discussion here. I don't want to make it a heavy article to
grasp. That's why divided to break into two smaller parts. As said at the very
beginning of our journey, we'll finish our journey in small steps. Our whole
motto is to discuss and learn without putting extra pressure on the mind.
Anyway, let's summarize our today's discussion.

  * different types of _shortcuts_ such as _global_ shortcuts and _message_ shortcuts
  * how to configure and create these through Slack configuration page
  * implemented _global_ shortcut to display website monitoring job creation form. Implementation of it was almost similar to what we did for _slash commands_. So it was quite quick.

Title image credit: [Business Vectors by
Vecteezy](https://www.vecteezy.com/free-vector/business)
