---
author: Sukhdeep Singh
categories:
- Python
date: May, 21
description: ''
post_status: publish
post_type: post
tags:
- Programming
- Slack
- app development
- tutorials
thumbnailUrl: https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/slash-commands-title.png
title: 'Slack App with Python: Slash Commands [Part-4]'
---

Slash commands are keywords to send a request to a _specified endpoint_ (like
event endpoints). The command _can be with or without a text/body_. These are
invoked by typing the slash(/) followed by your command.

* * *

We already covered _slack events_. Events are great but lack interactivity. We
want something that can be kicked off manually. This is where _slash commands_
come into play. There are many predefined commands by Slack. However, we want
to implement our own command as per our requirements. Let's name our command
as `/webmonitor`.

Refer to my first article to get the essence of the whole of this discussion:
[Most effective way to understand Slack app
development](https://pennow.tech/essential-skills-to-develop-slack-apps/)

## Overview of _slash_ commands

When a user enters a command into Slack's _message composer box_ , slack sends
those commands to a configured endpoint. From there these commands are
received by the app, which processes these commands and returns the response
back. The whole sequence is explained beautifully by the flow diagram:
[caption id="attachment_1454" align="aligncenter" width="1300"]![slash-
command-sequence-diagram](https://pennow.tech/wp-
content/uploads/2021/05/slash-command-sequence-diagram.png) slash command
sequence diagram[/caption] Response sent back by the app could be in _plain
text_ or in _JSON_ format. In this article we'll be implementing two of our
slash commands:

  * `/webmonitor create [website url]`: To create a new monitoring job that will ping a given website URL.
  * `/webmonitor list`: to list down all the web monitoring jobs created in the running session.

Actually, it's a single command but carrying a different text/body. That's why
I referred to them as two commands. As part of our project, we'll be
implementing multiple such commands. Visit our introductory article to see a
[list of all of these slash commands](https://pennow.tech/essential-skills-to-
develop-slack-apps/#webmonitor-slash-commands). Then without further delay,
let's build our slash commands, which will return us current time in Germany

## Configuration _Slash Command_

Open your Slack _application's_ configuration page, and navigate to **Features
> Slash commands**. Click on **Create new Command** : [caption
id="attachment_1453" align="aligncenter" width="696"]![slash-command-
creation](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/slash-command-
creation.png) slash command creation[/caption] When you click on this button,
you will be taken to the next screen. There you will be asked to fill in a few
pieces of information. The most important of them are the following:

  * **Command** : Enter your slash command name, which you will be implementing. In our case, it is a **web monitor**.
  * **Request URL:** As we discussed in the [previous article](https://pennow.tech/slack-app-with-python-handling-slack-events-part-3/#configuring-slack-events), a **Request URL** is a combination of a _webserver address_  and an _endpoint_. Just to remind you that endpoint is where Slack will send this command to be processed. Just like events, Slack sends every command on `/slack/events` by default.

Our filled page should look like below. [caption id="attachment_1452"
align="aligncenter" width="661"]![slash-command-creation-
form](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/slashc-command-creation-
form.png) slash command creation form[/caption] Click on the **Save** button,
and we're halfway done to our working application.  __Attention You might
require to add a permission scope for commands to your Slack app's
configuration page. Otherwise, you'll get a permission error while running
your app. So make sure commands permission is added under Features > OAuth &
Permissions > Scopes

## Command Handler Implementation

Let us get back to our development machine. Create a new file, and [initialize
our slack app](https://pennow.tech/slack-app-getting-
started/#Start_with_implementation):

    
    
    import os
    from dotenv import load_dotenv
    from slack_bolt import App
    
    load_dotenv()
    
    app = App(
        token=os.environ.get("SLACK_API_TOKEN"),
        signing_secret=os.environ.get("SLACK_SIGNING_SECRET")
    )
    ...
    if __name__ == '__main__':
        app.start(port=5000)
    

Now, let's implement our command handler. Start with something simple. For
example, you'll enter the command `webmonitor` in Slack, and our app will
simply return `Hello`

    
    
    @app.command("/webmonitor")
    def repeat_text(ack, say, payload):
        ack()
        say("Hello")
    

There are two things important here:

  * First, we added a command handler at the top handle command `\webmonitor`.
  * Second is the `ack()` statement to acknowledge the command sent by Slack. This must be sent _within 3 seconds_ of receiving the command. Otherwise, you'll receive an **_Operation timeout_** error:

[caption id="attachment_1451" align="aligncenter" width="530"]![slack-command-
timeout](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/slack-command-
timeout.png) slack command timeout[/caption] Hence, it should always be the
first statement in the handler.

### Specifying Command Parameters

Each command takes exactly one parameter: **text**. It is everything you can
write after the command name. You can write any number of words, separated by
spaces. It doesn't require any changes inside your _slack app configuration
page_. However, it needs some changes inside your code to respond back as per
the command body. After knowing this, let's extend our existing command. Let's
enter: `/webmonitor create www.google.com`. This time we'll simply return the
command parameters entered. Later on, we'll add actual functionality to our
command. Now, modify our command handler to read the extra text supplied with
our command:

    
    
    @app.command("/webmonitor")
    def webmonitor_command_handler(ack, say, payload):
        ack()
        command_parameters = payload.get('text')
        if command_parameters:
            say (f'You entered: {command_parameters}.')
        else:
            say('No command body was entered.')
    

  * First, we retrieved the _parameters specified along with the slash command_ (line 4)
  * Then we returned the response whether _command parameters_ were specified or not.

Let's modify the above code a little bit to parse the input command
parameters:

    
    
    jobs_list = []
    
    @app.command("/webmonitor")
    def webmonitor_command_handler(ack, say, payload, respond):
        ack()
        text = payload.get('text')
    
        if text is None:
            respond ('Nothing to do')
            return
    
        user = payload.get('user_name')
        command_params = tuple(text.split())
    
        if command_params[0] == 'create':
            web_url=command_params[1]
            jobs_list.append(web_url)
            job_id = jobs_list.index(web_url)
            status = "Yet to implement"
            say (f"Command for {web_url} was created by {user}")
    

All of this code is self-explanatory. First, we checked if there are any
command parameters. If there is no parameter, then respond back, and return.
However, if there are command parameters, then extract them and check if the
first parameter is for URL monitoring _job_ creation. If yes, then parse the
required parameters, and respond as: [caption id="attachment_1457"
align="aligncenter" width="536"]![webmonitor-job-creation-response-plain-
text](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/webmonitor-job-creation-
response-plain-text.png) webmonitor job creation response plain text[/caption]
If we look at the display, this looks very dull. Let's make it a little
sophisticated.

### Sending JSON Response instead of Plain Text

Till now, we're sending responses in _plain text_. However, as we discussed
before, we can send a more customized [responses with the help of
_JSON_](https://pennow.tech/sending-messages-to-
slack/#Formatting_the_message). Our returned message will be displayed like:
[caption id="attachment_1456" align="aligncenter" width="544"]![webmonitor-
job-creation-response](https://pennow.tech/wp-
content/uploads/2021/05/webmonitor-job-creation-response.png) webmonitor job
creation response[/caption] Let's compose our JSON message first:

    
    
    def create_response(web_url, job_id, status, creator):
        data = {
            "text": "New Paid Time Off request from Fred Enriquez",
            "blocks": [
                {
                    "type": "header",
                    "text": {
                        "type": "plain_text",
                        "text": "Web Monitoring Job",
                        "emoji": True
                    }
                },
                {
                    "type": "section",
                    "fields": [
                        {
                            "type": "mrkdwn",
                            "text": f"*Job ID:*\n{job_id}"
                        },
                        {
                            "type": "mrkdwn",
                            "text": f"*URL:*\n{web_url}"
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "type": "section",
                    "fields": [
                        {
                            "type": "mrkdwn",
                            "text": f"*Created by:*\n<@{creator}>"
                        },
                        {
                            "type": "mrkdwn",
                            "text": f"*Status:*\n{status}"
                        }
                    ]
                }
            ]
        }
    
        return data
    

If you have gone through my article on [formatting the
message](https://pennow.tech/sending-messages-to-
slack/#Formatting_the_message), then the above code should be easy to
understand that each Slack message is composed of multiple blocks. Here, at
the top we're specifying the header of the message, then we specified two
_sections_ inside the blocks, and each section is of type text. We did all
that inside a function only to have code clarity and readability. This
function accepts a few more parameters to fill inside the response message.
Now, let's replace our existing statement to respond back with the following
one. Rest, all of the code will remain the same as before.

    
    
        say (create_response(web_url, job_id, status, user))
    

Run your program, and you should see the message displayed in the same format
as we discussed above.

### Implementing _/webmonitor list_ command

This command will simply return all the jobs stored inside the app.
implementation of this is almost similar to _create a job_. The only
difference is how we fetch the list. So, let's fetch the jobs from the list,
and make our response message:

    
    
    def list_response(jobs_list):
        data = {
            "text": "New Paid Time Off request from Fred Enriquez",
            "blocks": [
                {
                    "type": "header",
                    "text": {
                        "type": "plain_text",
                        "text": "Web Monitoring Jobs List",
                        "emoji": True
                    }
                }
            ]
        }
        
        section_format = {
                    "type": "section",
                    "fields": [
                        {
                            "type": "mrkdwn",
                            "text": "*Job ID:*\n{job_id}"
                        },
                        {
                            "type": "mrkdwn",
                            "text": "*URL:*\n{url}"
                        }
                    ]
                }
    
        for job_id, url in enumerate(jobs_list):
            text_id = f"*Job ID:*\n{job_id}"
            text_url = f"*URL:*\n{url}"
    
            section_format['fields'][0]['text'] = text_id
            section_format['fields'][1]['text'] = text_url
    
            data['blocks'].append(copy.deepcopy(section_format))
    
        return data
    

This is all related to Python: creating a dictionary, iterating lists, and
filling the dictionary, and finally returning the composed dictionary. Next,
we'll implement handling for `/webmonitor lists` command. Go to the same
handler function, and add the following code snippet.

    
    
    @app.command("/webmonitor")
    def webmonitor_command_handler(ack, say, payload, respond):
    	...
        elif command_params[0] == 'list':
            if jobs_list: 
                say (list_response(jobs_list))
    

The above code checks whether the command parameter was for `list`. If the
answer is yes, then it sends the message we composed above. Now run your
program, and you should see a similar response as below: [caption
id="attachment_1458" align="alignnone" width="548"]![webmonitor-list-
response](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/webmonitor-list-
response.png) webmonitor list response[/caption] In the same way, you can also
implement other commands. Source Code: [slash_commands.py
(GitHub)](https://github.com/pennowtech/slack-app-python-slack-
bolt/blob/master/slash_commands.py) __Note! This might be that the source code
could be changed by the time you check it. You might find other commands that
could also be implemented in the checked-in code with more functionalities

## Limitation

We have seen how helpful could be _slash commands_. You simply send a command
to the endpoint(or app) and receive the response back. However, here is one
limitation of the _slash commands_. You can't send more than one parameter to
slack commands. It is not possible to specify additional parameters. Of
course, you can parse the string, and look for specific parameters. But that
will be an extra work and impacts the simplicity provided by _slack apps_.
_Slack_ was also aware of this, and that's why they provide another feature:
_interactive dialogues or messages_. Yes, we will be discussing that in our
next article.

## Summary

Here we discussed:

  * how to _create and configure_ slack slash commands
  * _implementing_ command handlers
  * specifying _command parameters_
  * sending the response in _JSON format_
  * and finally discussed one major limitation of the _slash commands_

[People vector created by rawpixel.com -
www.freepik.com](https://www.freepik.com/vectors/people)
