---
author: Sukhdeep Singh
categories:
- Python
date: May, 21
description: ''
post_status: publish
post_type: post
tags:
- Programming
- Slack
- app development
thumbnailUrl: https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/slack-development-getting-started.svg
title: 'Slack App with Python: Getting Started with Development [Part -1]'
---

The agenda of this first article in the series is to get familiar with the
Slack configuration webpage. Along with that we'll also set up our development
environment, and finish with a simple messaging application.

* * *

This article will serve as _Hello World_ program of our _slack_ application.
Even if it sounds very simple, still I'll suggest to go through it sincerely.
This article will serve as our foundation stone. Many of the terms,
configurations, and technicalities learned here will be used in later
articles. So just pay attention here.  __Revise We already discussed our
action plan on what is our expectation from series of these articles. [Refer
our introductory article.](https://pennow.tech/essential-skills-to-develop-
slack-apps/) if you did not get the chance to go through that.

## Slack app configuration

Let's start with slack configuration first. However, as it is our first time,
we need to create a Slack app first.

### Create a Slack app

This article is part of: [Most effective way to understand Slack app
development](https://pennow.tech/essential-skills-to-develop-slack-apps/)

Before you start, you will need a Slack App. Head on [Slack's app creation
webpage](https://api.slack.com/apps/new) , and create a new app. If you are
signed into more than one workspace, pick a Development Workspace from the
dropdown. [caption id="attachment_1357" align="alignnone" width="704"]![Create
a Slack app](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/slack-app-
creation.png) Create a Slack app[/caption] Click on **Create App** button, and
you will be taken to app's _basic configuration_ page.

### Provide permission to the app

We want our app to appear like any other user, which can participate in any
conversations inside channels. In a Slack app, this is called a [bot
user](https://api.slack.com/bot-users). We'll provide our _bot/app_ the
permission to send any messages. To do this, navigate to **Features > OAuth &
Permissions**, and scroll down down a little to **Scopes**. Click on **Add an
OAuth Scope** , and select **chat:write** from the drop down. [caption
id="attachment_1355" align="alignnone" width="656"]![ Add an OAuth
Scope](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/slack-add-an-aouth-
scope.png) Add an OAuth Scope[/caption] Now go on top, and click on **Install
to Workspace**. This will install the app into our development workspace.
[caption id="attachment_1352" align="alignnone" width="840"]![Install To
Workspace](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Install-To-
Workspace.png) Install To Workspace[/caption] Next page will ask your
permission to access your workspace. **Allow** it [caption
id="attachment_1354" align="alignnone" width="668"]![Permission to access your
workspace](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/permission-to-
access.png) Permission to access your workspace[/caption] It'll return to the
same screen. Once the App is installed, it displays a **Bot User OAuth
Token**. This will be required to authenticate our app with the _Slack_ We'll
come to this part later when we'll start development. [caption
id="attachment_1353" align="alignnone" width="755"]![Bot User OAuth
Token](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/oauth-and-
permissions.png) Bot User OAuth Token[/caption]

## Setting up our development environment

As I told you before that we'll be using Python for our development. So let's
get to our development machine, and set it up for our future endeavor. Open
your terminal, and change into the directory where you want to create your
project. **Create Virtual Environment** Create a fresh virtual environment for
our development purpose. I named it `webmonitor`

    
    
    python -m venv .venv

Activate the newly created virtual environment:

    
    
    source .venv/Scripts/activate

**Install`slack_bolt` package** `slack_bolt` is a helper library officially
built by Slack. It can send and receive messages from a Slack channel. Install
it with the `pip` command:

    
    
    pip install slack_bolt

**Install`dotenv`library** We'll be exporting a few of the environment
variables such as the **OAuth Token** we just discussed above. A common
practice for Python developers is to export these as _environment variables_.
However, I personally don't favor that approach. I prefer to do it
_programmatically_ with the help of `python-dotenv` package. Install it too.

    
    
    pip install python-dotenv

## Start with implementation

We've got everything we need to start writing our first app. As a first step
copy your **Bot User OAuth Token** from **Features > OAuth & Permissions**
page. Also copy the **Signing Secret** code from the **Basic Information**
page. Now the question is where to save these tokens. As I'll be storing my
files on **Github** 's public domain so I don't want to expose these tokens
through my source code. The better option is to store them in a file, which
will not be checked in. So I create a config file called `.env`, which is
added to the `.gitignore` file Create a `.env` file, and add this line:

    
    
    SLACK_API_TOKEN=xoxb-...
    SLACK_SIGNING_SECRET=72e...
    

I want to have easy access to these variables. This is where our `dotenv`
package will be helpful. It reads the _key, value_ pair from `.env` file, and
adds them to the environment variable at runtime. Create a new file named
`get_channels_list.py` and include the following code to set the environment
variable.

    
    
    from dotenv import load_dotenv
    
    load_dotenv()
    

After loading our environment variables, let us initialize our _slack_ app. Go
to the same file, and add these lines:

    
    
    from slack_bolt import App
    
    
    app = App(
        token=os.environ.get("SLACK_API_TOKEN"),
        signing_secret=os.environ.get("SLACK_SIGNING_SECRET")
    )
    

The code initializes the _slack_ `App` with our `SLACK_API_TOKEN`, and
`SLACK_SIGNING_SECRET` exported as an environment variable earlier. To test
whether our app has been initialized successfully; type the following code:

    
    
    print(app.client.api_test()) # or print(app.client.api_call('api.test'))
    

If it returns something similar to the following, then your app was
initialized successfully:

    
    
    {'ok': True, 'args': {'token': '<your token should be displayed here>'}}
    

If you get back `{u'ok': False, u'error': u'invalid_auth'}` then double-check
whether you copied your Slack tokens correctly  __Tip You can also test any
Slack APIs on its website. So go to the [Slack website to test `api.test`
method](https://api.slack.com/methods/api.test/test) to verify your tokens. It
will also display the result immediately. This is a great place to explore the
working of any slack APIs. Enter one more quick test for our authentication
with another line of code in the REPL:

    
    
    slack_client.api_call("auth.test")
    

You should see an output similar to this one:

    
    
    {'ok': True, 'url': 'https://pennowtech.slack.com/', 'team': 'PenNow.tech', 'user': 'websitemonitoring', 'team_id': 'T0217DCRW64', 'user_id': 'U020LGB9XC3', 'bot_id': 'B020YU6U01X', 'is_enterprise_install': False}
    

Awesome! We’re authorized to start using the Slack API through our account.
Now the fun begins as we can start programmatically obtaining Slack data and
handling messages! First, let’s fetch information on what all channels are
listed in _Slack_ via `conversations_list`. We will also provide which _type_
of channels we want to fetch whether private or public ones.

    
    
    result = app.client.conversations_list(
        types="public_channel, private_channel"
    )
    

Slack returns back the result with two keys: `ok` and `channels`. `ok` tells
us the result of our query execution and `channels` contains the data we need
on the list of channels. Finally, let’s print all the channels:

    
    
    if result.get('ok'):
        channels_list = result['channels']
        for channel in channels_list:
            print(channel['name'] + " (" + channel['id'] + ")")
    

Now run the code. Ah but it fails! Let's look at the error trace:

    
    
    slack.errors.SlackApiError: The request to the Slack API failed.
    The server responded with: {'ok': False, 'error': 'missing_scope', 'needed': 'groups:read', 'provided': 'chat:write,commands,channels:read'}
    

Here, it is asking us to add some more scopes before proceeding further. In
this case, it is asking for `channels:read` and others to add. Let's add these
_scopes_ in the same way as we did for `chat:write` in our first step. Go to
**Features > OAuth & Permissions > Scopes**, and click on **Add an OAuth
Scope**. Add all the scopes which were reported in the above _error_ trace.
[caption id="attachment_1356" align="alignnone" width="680"]![Slack add
channels:read](https://pennow.tech/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/slack-add-group-
and-channel-read-scope.png) Slack add channels:read[/caption] Now, run the
same program, and you should get the channels list. It returns the name of the
channel along with their unique identifier:

    
    
    python post_simple_message_to_slack.py
    Channels: 
    general (C020EGX0VRB)
    development (C020HRG2ELB)
    test (C020JUNPFJR)
    random (C0217DCS9PA)
    

Source code:[get_channels_list.py
(GitHub)](https://github.com/pennowtech/slack-app-python-slack-
bolt/blob/master/get_channels_list.py)

## Summary

In this article we discussed:

  * how to create our first app, and how to add various scopes to enable our app to communicate with Slack.
  * Next, we set up our development environment, which was really easy
  * Finally, we saw how to write a simple app that can fetch the data from Slack.

I know this was a little longer article. However, all the details were very
basics. Therefore, I hope you didn't face any difficulty to comprehend any
details.

Title image by [Graphic Art
Sangla](https://pixabay.com/users/negigraphic365-6516708/?utm_source=link-
attribution&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=image&utm_content=4536630) from
[Pixabay](https://pixabay.com/?utm_source=link-
attribution&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=image&utm_content=4536630)
